Rewrite Build Lifecycle documentation in a consistent docs voice (#22455)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/authoring-builds/build_lifecycle.adoc

[[build_lifecycle]]
= Build Lifecycle

Gradle is an example of *dependency based programming*: you define tasks and dependencies between tasks.
Gradle guarantees that these tasks execute in the order of their dependencies.
Your build scripts and plugins configure this dependency graph.
This page discusses the phases of the lifecycle Gradle passes through as it interprets those scripts.
Additionally, this page explains how you can react to events of the lifecycle using notifications.

== Task Graphs

> Some build tools assemble a task graph lazily, as they execute tasks.
> Gradle builds the complete task graph eagerly, before executing any task.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
Some build tools assemble a task graph as they execute tasks.
Gradle builds the task graph before executing any task.
When you use lazy configuration syntax, Gradle skips configuration for tasks that aren't part of the current build.

```
@eskatos can you verify that this reword is technically correct? I figure it's a good idea to bring up lazy configuration early here.

Reviewer: I would not use the word `syntax` here as this is more about the used APIs.
Maybe simply:

> When you use task configuration avoidance, Gradle skips configuration for tasks that aren't part of the current build.

as in https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/task_configuration_avoidance.html

Within each project, tasks form a http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph[Directed Acyclic Graph] (DAG).

This diagram shows two example task graphs: one abstract and the other concrete.
The diagram represents dependencies between tasks as arrows:

.Two examples of Gradle task graphs
image::task-dag-examples.png[Example task graphs]

Both plugins and your own build scripts contribute to the task graph via the <<tutorial_using_tasks#sec:task_dependencies,task dependency mechanism>>.

[[sec:build_phases]]
== Build Phases

A Gradle build has three distinct phases.
Gradle runs these phases in order: first initialization, then configuration, and finally execution.

Initialization::

> - Detects the settings file.
> - Evaluates the <<organizing_gradle_projects#sec:settings_file,settings file>> to determine which projects and included builds participate in the build.

Author: Good point. Must have overlooked that when I reorged.
```suggestion
- Detects the <<organizing_gradle_projects#sec:settings_file,settings file>>.
- Evaluates the settings file to determine which projects and included builds participate in the build.
```

- Creates a link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Project.html[`Project`] instance for every project.
Configuration::
- Evaluates the build scripts of every project participating in the build.
- Creates a task graph for requested tasks.
Execution::
- Schedules and executes each of the selected tasks in the order of their dependencies.

=== Example

The following example shows which parts of settings and build files correspond to various build phases:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/buildlifecycle/basic/groovy",files="settings.gradle[];build.gradle[]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/buildlifecycle/basic/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[];build.gradle.kts[]"]
====

> [source.multi-language-sample,groovy]

Author: ```suggestion
The following command configures and executes the `test` and `testBoth` tasks specified above.
Because Gradle only configures requested tasks and their dependencies, the `configured` task never configures.

[source.multi-language-sample,groovy]
```

@eskatos Can you double-check this to ensure technical correctness? https://github.com/gradle/gradle/pull/22455/files#r1000237190

[[build_lifecycle]]
= Build Lifecycle

Gradle is an example of *dependency based programming*: you define tasks and dependencies between tasks.
Gradle guarantees that these tasks execute in the order of their dependencies.
Your build scripts configure this dependency graph.
This page discusses the phases of the lifecycle Gradle passes through as it interprets those scripts.
Additionally, this page explains how you can react to events of the lifecycle using notifications.

== Task Graphs

Some build tools assemble a task graph lazily, as they execute tasks.

> Gradle builds the complete task graph eagerly, before executing any task.

Author: Addressed here: https://github.com/gradle/gradle/pull/22455#discussion_r1001879204

Within each project, tasks form a http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph[Directed Acyclic Graph] (DAG).

This diagram shows two example task graphs: one abstract and the other concrete.
The diagram represents dependencies between tasks as arrows:

.Two examples of Gradle task graphs
image::task-dag-examples.png[Example task graphs]

Both plugins and your own build scripts contribute to the task graph via the <<tutorial_using_tasks#sec:task_dependencies,task dependency mechanism>>.

[[sec:build_phases]]
== Build Phases

A Gradle build has three distinct phases.
Gradle runs these phases in order: first initialization, then configuration, and finally execution.

Initialization::
- Detects the settings file.

> - Evaluates the <<organizing_gradle_projects#sec:settings_file,settings file>> to determine which projects participate in the build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Evaluates the <<organizing_gradle_projects#sec:settings_file,settings file>> to determine which projects and included builds participate in the build.
```

- Creates a link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Project.html[`Project`] instance for every project.
Configuration::
- Evaluates the build scripts of every project participating in the build.

> - Creates a task graph for all projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Creates a task graph for requested tasks.
```

Author: Hm, maybe I'm misunderstanding here. Based on your previous comment, it sounds like this is true for projects that 100% use lazy configuration. Is this misleading for projects that don't use lazy configuration?

Reviewer: There's a nuance here.
The task graph will always contain requested tasks and their dependencies only. Lazy task configuration or not.
In order to populate the task graph, Gradle will create and configure all the required task instances.

For all other tasks, not required in the task graph, if they are lazily configured then they won't be configured at all. If they are eagerly configured they are always configured when evaluating the Project.

Does it clarifies things?

Execution::

> - Calculates tasks to run based on the passed task name arguments.
> - Executes each of the selected tasks in the order of their dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Schedules and executes each of the selected tasks in the order of their dependencies.
```

=== Example

The following example shows which parts of settings and build files correspond to various build phases:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/buildlifecycle/basic/groovy",files="settings.gradle[];build.gradle[]"]

> include::sample[dir="snippets/buildlifecycle/basic/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[];build.gradle.kts[]"]

Reviewer: In that sample you can see that the `println` statement which is part of the configuration of the `:configured` task is not executed because it is not part of the task graph for the requested tasks. This is lazy task configuration in action.

Author: Great point. Added this to the prose here: https://github.com/gradle/gradle/pull/22455/files#r1001869201

include::{snippetsPath}/buildlifecycle/basic/tests/buildlifecycle.out[]
----

[[sec:initialization]]
== Initialization

> In the initialization phase, Gradle detects the set of projects and included builds participating in the build.
> Then, Gradle evaluates the settings file. Finally, Gradle instantiates `Project` instances for each project.

Author: Good point. This should read "First", not "Then".

```suggestion
In the initialization phase, Gradle detects the set of projects and included builds participating in the build.
Gradle first evaluates the settings file. Then, Gradle instantiates `Project` instances for each project.
```

=== Detect Settings File

When you run Gradle in a directory that contains a `settings.gradle` file, Gradle uses that `settings.gradle` file to initialize the build.
You can run Gradle within any subproject of the build.footnote:[Gradle supports partial multi-project builds (see <<intro_multi_project_builds.adoc#intro_multi_project_builds,Executing Multi-Project Builds>>).]
When you run Gradle in a directory that contains *no* `settings.gradle` file:

> . Gradle looks for a `settings.gradle` file in parent directories.
> . If Gradle finds a `settings.gradle` file, Gradle checks if the current project is part of the multi-project build. If so, Gradle builds as a multi-project.
> . If Gradle does not find a `settings.gradle` file, Gradle builds as a single project.

Author: ```suggestion
. Gradle looks for a `settings.gradle(.kts)` file in parent directories.
. If Gradle finds a `settings.gradle(.kts)` file, Gradle checks if the current project is part of the multi-project build. If so, Gradle builds as a multi-project.
. If Gradle does not find a `settings.gradle(.kts)` file, Gradle builds as a single project.
```

> . If Gradle does not find a `settings.gradle` file, Gradle builds as a single project.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to avoid explicitly using only the Groovy DSL or only the Kotlin DSL name for the settings file, and either generically call it "settings file" or say something like `settings.gradle(.kts)`.

Author: Agreed. Updated usages to either read "settings file" or include the (.kts). Thanks for pointing this out!

In the standard Gradle project layout, project paths match the physical subproject layout on disk.
The automatic search for a `settings.gradle` file only works for multi-project builds with a standard project layout.

> To build projects that use a nonstandard layout, execute the build from the directory that contains `settings.gradle`.

Author: This also works for me locally. Do you know who we can ask to find out if and where this breaks? I'm not comfortable removing this statement without some guarantee that we now better support nonstandard layouts. But I suspect there are *some* nonstandard layouts that would break settings file detection.

> In the standard Gradle project layout, project paths match the physical subproject layout on disk.
> The automatic search for a `settings.gradle` file only works for multi-project builds with a standard project layout.
> To build projects that use a nonstandard layout, execute the build from the directory that contains `settings.gradle`.

Author: ```suggestion
In the standard Gradle project layout, project paths match the physical subproject layout on disk.
The automatic search for a settings file only works for multi-project builds with a standard project layout.
To build projects that use a nonstandard layout, execute the build from the directory that contains `settings.gradle(.kts)`.
```

include::{snippetsPath}/buildlifecycle/basic/tests/buildlifecycle.out[]
----

[[sec:initialization]]
== Initialization

> In the initialization phase, Gradle detects the set of projects participating in the build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the initialization phase, Gradle detects the set of projects and included builds participating in the build.
```

When you run Gradle in a directory that contains a `settings.gradle` file, Gradle uses that `settings.gradle` file to initialize the build.
You can run Gradle within any subproject of the build.footnote:[Gradle supports partial multi-project builds (see <<intro_multi_project_builds.adoc#intro_multi_project_builds,Executing Multi-Project Builds>>).]
When you run Gradle in a directory that contains *no* `settings.gradle` file:

. Gradle looks for a `settings.gradle` file in parent directories.
. If Gradle finds a `settings.gradle` file, Gradle checks if the current project is part of the multi-project build. If so, Gradle builds as a multi-project.
. If Gradle does not find a `settings.gradle` file, Gradle builds as a single project.

In the standard Gradle project layout, project paths match the physical subproject layout on disk.
The automatic search for a `settings.gradle` file only works for multi-project builds with a standard project layout.
To build projects that use a nonstandard layout, execute the build from the directory that contains `settings.gradle`.

=== Evaluate Settings File

During settings file evaluation, Gradle:

- Adds libraries to your build script classpath.

> - Defines which projects participate in a multi-project build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Defines which included builds participate in a composite build.
- Defines which projects participate in a multi-project build.
```

Gradle creates a `Project` for every project in the build.
By default, each `Project` has a name equal to the name of its top level directory.
Every project except the root project has a parent project.
Any project may have child projects.

== Configuration

In the configuration phase, Gradle adds tasks and other properties to the projects generated by the initialization phase.

> By the end of the configuration phase, Gradle has a complete task execution graph for each project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the end of the configuration phase, Gradle has a complete task execution graph for the requested tasks.
```

[[sec:project_evaluation]]
=== Project Evaluation

During project evaluation, Gradle evaluates build scripts to build a task hierarchy within a `Project`.
This hierarchy includes inputs, actions, and outputs for all tasks.

==== React to Project Evaluation

You can receive a notification immediately before and immediately after a project evaluates.
These notifications work even when project evaluation fails.
You can configure project evaluation notifications for all projects or a specific project.
For example, you could use these notifications for:

- additional configuration after applying all definitions in a build script
- custom logging
- custom profiling

> The following example adds a `test` task to each project where the `hasTests` property value is `true`:

Reviewer: This example uses `allprojects {}` which should be discouraged in favor of convention plugins.
This example also uses extra properties which should be discouraged in favor of project extensions registered by convention plugins.
This might be out of scope of this PR though.

Author: Interesting! This PR: https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/21216 is also on my list, which touches on this same issue... I'll DM you about how we can set a better example.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/buildlifecycle/projectEvaluateEvents/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=after-evaluate];project-a.gradle[]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/buildlifecycle/projectEvaluateEvents/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=after-evaluate];project-a.gradle.kts[]"]
====

----
> gradle -q test
include::{snippetsPath}/buildlifecycle/projectEvaluateEvents/tests/projectEvaluateEvents.out[]
----

> The following example uses `Project.afterEvaluate()` to run logic when a project finishes evaluation:

Reviewer: The example actually doesn't use `afterEvaluate {}` which BTW is discouraged. It uses `gradle.afterProject {}` instead.

Author: ```suggestion
The following example uses `Project.afterProject()` to run logic when a project finishes evaluation:
```
Should we then rephrase to this?

Reviewer: Yes :+1:

include::{snippetsPath}/buildlifecycle/buildProjectEvaluateEvents/tests-kotlin/buildProjectEvaluateEvents.kotlin.out[]
----

To receive these events via a listener instead of a closure, add a link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/ProjectEvaluationListener.html[ProjectEvaluationListener] to a build's link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.invocation.Gradle.html[Gradle] instance.

=== Task Execution Graph Assembly

During project evaluation, Gradle assembles the *task execution graph*: a http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph[DAG] representing the dependency relationships between tasks.

[[sec:task_execution_graph_ready]]
=== React to Task Execution Graph Assembly

You can receive a notification immediately after Gradle finishes populating a project's task execution graph.

To receive these events, add a link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/execution/TaskExecutionGraphListener.html[TaskExecutionGraphListener] to a project's link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/execution/TaskExecutionGraph.html[TaskExecutionGraph].

=== Task Creation

> During project evaluation, Gradle creates tasks and configures inputs, outputs, and actions for those tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During project evaluation, Gradle registers tasks and their configuration actions. The configuration actions define inputs, outputs, and actions for those tasks. They are evaluated if the task is part of the task graph for the requested tasks.
```

Author: Brilliant, good call on changing "creates" to "registers" -- this is one of those subtle nudges we can provide in the docs to get users to use newer, better APIs.
